.\" arksh(1) — ARKsh man page
.\" Generated for ARKsh (Archetype Shell)
.TH ARKSH 1 "2026" "ARKsh" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
arksh \- Archetype Shell: typed object-aware shell and scripting language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B arksh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fISCRIPT\fR [\fIARG\fR ...]]
.br
.B arksh
\fB\-c\fR \fICOMMAND\fR
.br
.B sh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fISCRIPT\fR [\fIARG\fR ...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B arksh
is an interactive shell and scripting language.
It provides classic POSIX-compatible shell execution while adding a typed,
object-aware runtime: filesystem resources, processes, numbers, strings,
lists, dictionaries, and command output are all first-class typed values
queryable through member-access chains
.RB ( \-> )
and object pipelines
.RB ( |> ).
.PP
When invoked as
.B sh
or with the
.B \-\-sh
flag,
.B arksh
operates in POSIX sh-compatibility mode: all non-POSIX syntax extensions are
disabled and the shell behaves as a POSIX-conformant
.BR sh (1)
substitute.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c \fICOMMAND\fR
Execute
.I COMMAND
as a single line and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-sh
Activate POSIX sh-compatibility mode.
Non-POSIX syntax (\fB\->\fR, \fB|>\fR, \fBlet\fR, \fBextend\fR,
\fBclass\fR, \fBswitch\fR, \fB[[\fR, \fB<<<\fR,
\fB<(\fR, \fB>(\fR, block literals) is rejected.
Plugin autoload and arksh-specific config are skipped.
The
.B ENV
environment variable is read as the startup file.
.TP
.BR \-\-login ", " \-l
Start as a login shell.
Reads the global profile and user profile in addition to the RC file.
See
.B STARTUP FILES
below.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print a summary of built-in commands, value resolvers, pipeline stages
and types, then exit.
.SH OPERANDS
If a
.I SCRIPT
argument is given (and it does not begin with
.BR \- ),
.B arksh
sources that file with the remaining arguments available as
.BR $1 ,
.BR $2 ,
etc.
Without any argument,
.B arksh
starts an interactive REPL.
.SH INVOCATION AS sh
When
.B argv[0]
is
.B sh
(or
.BR -sh ),
.B arksh
automatically activates POSIX sh-compatibility mode.
Creating a symlink is sufficient:
.PP
.RS
ln -s "$(which arksh)" /usr/local/bin/sh
.RE
.PP
Scripts with
.B #!/bin/sh
or
.B #!/usr/bin/env sh
shebangs will then use
.B arksh
in sh mode.
.SH STARTUP FILES
Startup files are loaded in the following order.
Files that do not exist are silently skipped.
.SS Normal (non-login) interactive shell
.TP
.B $ARKSH_RC
If set, only this file is sourced.
.TP
.B $ARKSH_CONFIG_DIR/arkshrc
Standard config directory RC.
.TP
.B ~/.arkshrc
Legacy fallback.
.SS Login shell (\fB\-\-login\fR or \fIargv[0]\fR starts with \fB\-\fR)
In addition to the RC file, login shells source:
.TP
.B $ARKSH_GLOBAL_PROFILE
If set, sourced as the system-wide profile (replaces
.BR /etc/arksh/profile ).
.TP
.B /etc/arksh/profile
System-wide profile (POSIX platforms only).
.TP
.B $ARKSH_LOGIN_PROFILE
If set, sourced as the user login profile.
.TP
.B $ARKSH_CONFIG_DIR/profile
User login profile.
.TP
.B ~/.arksh_profile
Legacy user login profile.
.SS sh-compatibility mode (\fB\-\-sh\fR or invoked as \fBsh\fR)
Only the file named by
.B ENV
is sourced (POSIX sh convention).
No arksh-specific files are read.
.SS Prompt configuration
.TP
.B $ARKSH_CONFIG
If set, loaded as the prompt configuration file.
.TP
.B arksh.conf
In the current working directory.
.TP
.B $ARKSH_CONFIG_DIR/prompt.conf
User prompt configuration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ARKSH_CONFIG_HOME
Override the configuration directory (default:
.BR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/arksh ,
fallback
.BR ~/.config/arksh ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_CACHE_HOME
Override the cache directory (default:
.BR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/arksh ,
fallback
.BR ~/.cache/arksh ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_STATE_HOME
Override the state directory (default:
.BR $XDG_STATE_HOME/arksh ,
fallback
.BR ~/.local/state/arksh ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_DATA_HOME
Override the data directory (default:
.BR $XDG_DATA_HOME/arksh ,
fallback
.BR ~/.local/share/arksh ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_PLUGIN_HOME
Override the plugin directory (default:
.BR $ARKSH_DATA_HOME/plugins ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_RC
Override the startup RC file path.
.TP
.B ARKSH_CONFIG
Override the prompt configuration file path.
.TP
.B ARKSH_HISTORY
Override the history file path (default: in
.BR $ARKSH_STATE_HOME ).
.TP
.B ARKSH_GLOBAL_PROFILE
Override the system-wide login profile path.
.TP
.B ARKSH_LOGIN_PROFILE
Override the user login profile path.
.TP
.B ARKSH_PERF
If set to a non-empty value other than
.BR 0 ,
enable internal performance counters.
.TP
.B ENV
Startup file loaded in sh-compatibility mode (POSIX sh convention).
.SH LANGUAGE OVERVIEW
.SS POSIX shell syntax
All standard POSIX sh constructs are supported:
variable assignment
.RB ( VAR=value ),
command substitution
.RB ( $(\|cmd\|) ),
arithmetic expansion
.RB ( $((\|expr\|)) ),
pipelines
.RB ( | ),
redirections
.RB ( > ,
.BR < ,
.BR >> ,
.BR 2> ,
.BR 2>&1 ),
heredoc
.RB ( <<EOF ),
control flow
.RB ( if / while / for / until / case ),
functions
.RB ( f()\| {\| \.\.\.\| } ),
and job control
.RB ( & ,
.BR fg ,
.BR bg ,
.BR wait ).
.SS arksh extensions (disabled in sh mode)
.TP
.B Object member access
.RS
.nf
\fIexpr\fR \fB\->\fR \fIproperty\fR
\fIexpr\fR \fB\->\fR \fImethod\fR(\fIargs\fR)
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Object pipeline
.RS
.nf
\fIexpr\fR \fB|>\fR \fIstage\fR(\fIargs\fR) \fB|>\fR \fIstage\fR ...
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Typed value bindings
.RS
.nf
\fBlet\fR \fIname\fR = \fIexpr\fR
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Block literals
.RS
.nf
[:\fIparam\fR | \fIbody\fR]
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Class definitions
.RS
.nf
\fBclass\fR \fIName\fR \fBdo\fR ... \fBendclass\fR
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Object extension
.RS
.nf
\fBextend\fR \fItarget\fR \fBproperty\fR \fIname\fR = \fIexpr\fR
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Extended conditional
.RS
.nf
\fB[[\fR \fIcondition\fR \fB]]\fR
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Switch statement
.RS
.nf
\fBswitch\fR \fIexpr\fR ; \fBcase\fR \fIval\fR ; \fBthen\fR ... \fBendswitch\fR
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Here-string
.RS
\fBcmd\fR \fB<<<\fR \fIword\fR
.RE
.TP
.B Process substitution
.RS
.nf
<(\fIcmd\fR)    >(\fIcmd\fR)
.fi
.RE
.SH BUILT-IN COMMANDS
A selection of notable built-ins.
Run
.B help
for the full list.
.TP
.BR cd " [" \fIdir\fR "]"
Change working directory.
.TP
.BI echo " [args]"
Write arguments to standard output.
.TP
.BI printf " format [args]"
Formatted output (POSIX).
.TP
.BI read " [-r] [-p prompt] [-t timeout] [var...]"
Read a line from standard input.
.TP
.BR set " [" \fB\-e\fR | \fB\-u\fR | \fB\-x\fR | \fB\-o\fR " option]"
Set shell options.
.TP
.BI export " [VAR[=value]]"
Mark variable for export to child processes.
.TP
.BI source " path"
Execute file in the current shell context.
.TP
.BI eval " string"
Parse and execute string as a shell command.
.TP
.BI exec " [cmd [args]]"
Replace the shell process with
.IR cmd .
.TP
.BI trap " [action signal...]"
Register signal handlers.
.TP
.BI getopts " optstring name [args]"
Parse option flags (POSIX).
.TP
.BI plugin " subcommand"
Manage plugins:
.BR load ,
.BR list ,
.BR info ,
.BR enable ,
.BR disable ,
.B autoload
.BR list .
.TP
.BI prompt " subcommand"
Manage the prompt:
.BR load ,
.BR render .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/arksh/arkshrc
Default interactive startup file.
.TP
.B ~/.config/arksh/prompt.conf
Default prompt configuration.
.TP
.B ~/.config/arksh/profile
Default login shell profile.
.TP
.B ~/.config/arksh/plugin-autoload.conf
List of plugins to load automatically on startup.
.TP
.B ~/.local/share/arksh/plugins/
Default plugin directory.
.TP
.B ~/.local/state/arksh/history
Command history file.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error or command failure.
.PP
In interactive mode, the exit status of the last executed command is available
as
.BR $? .
.SH EXAMPLES
Interactive use:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a single command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh -c '. -> type'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh my_script.arksh arg1 arg2
.fi
.RE
.PP
POSIX sh-compatible:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh --sh my_script.sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Login shell:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh --login
.fi
.RE
.PP
Query the current directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
arksh -c '. -> children() |> where(type == "file") |> sort(size desc)'
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sh (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR dash (1)
.PP
Full documentation:
.I docs/user-manual.md
.br
Installation guide:
.I docs/guide-installation.md
.br
Scripting guide:
.I docs/guide-scripting.md
.br
Plugin author guide:
.I docs/guide-plugin-author.md
.br
Troubleshooting:
.I docs/troubleshooting.md
.SH BUGS
Report issues at the project repository.
.SH AUTHORS
ARKsh contributors.
